#### Twitter Yelling and Emotional Robots


Jen and I decided upon “#ObamaSpeech” as our search term. We arrived on this term after several failed attempts to scrape data from other terms. Through this process of discovering what and how to search, I became familiar with the strengths and limitations of the TAGS plug-in. For me, temporality posed the largest problem in that it was important to time when to run the script to capture certain kinds of data. Additionally, if the event/subject is generating a significant amount of attention at the time, the spreadsheet can only capture a brief snapshot of the Twitter response to the event, as it is limited to a certain number of tweets. Not only is the process capped by a maximum number of tweets archived at a specific moment, it is also difficult to explore a topic outside of the “now” because of its relegation to the last seven days, rather than allowing for a specified date range. Additionally, the more tweets I attempted to archive at one time, the greater likelihood the script would fail and yield zero results.

To tell my data story I will draw from a search of “#ObamaSpeech” that archived 2,970 tweets. Please note that it is representative of a just-under-five-minute snapshot of the Twitterverse’s reactions to President Obama’s speech that was given December 6, 2015 at 8pm EST.

Using this data set, TagsExplorer assembles and allows exploring the data in many helpful and many not-so-helpful ways. The visualization is a data hairball and completely inaccessible; however, toggling through the menu tabs, “TopTweeters” allows me to see who is discussing the hashtag most. A strength of TagsExplore is its ability to answer the following questions for this data story: who uses social media to engage political discourse? Why and how are tweets used in this realm of discourse?

By using TagsExplorer and TagsArhcive in tandem, the top five contributors provide some insight to these research questions. The top contributer acted as a spammer who repeated this message 15 times: “@realDonaldTrump &amp; @AnnCoulter #ColationForTrump #TRUMP4POTUS #TRUMPTRAIN #Trump2016 @GOP @DanScavino #ObamaSpeech https://t.co/AJUMzWXliV.” Similarly, the four other TopTweeters RTed several anti-Obama tweets. Of those 67 tweets, all were basic RTs with no new original commentary, except for one “Obama sucks.” It appears that political hashtags (or perhaps just #ObamaSpeech) are used by Right-leaning tweeters to angrily “yell” into cyberspace. There are no conversations or engaging dialogue occurring in the top tweets of the data set.

TopHashtags also yields interesting data for this story by showing word association. How do users use hashtags in relation to others? Of course, they must use the “ordained” hashtag to get into the conversation, but then they are free to use their own haghtags to “code”/tag the conversation. The top associated hashtags were #tcot (top conservatives on Twitter), #obama, #ISIS, #trump2016, and #wakeupamerica. Similar to the TopTweeters, these hashtags suggest that the majority of these tweets are anti-Obama, pro-Trump, and worried about ISIS.

Because these tweets seem to capture hate and fear, I ran them through a “sentiment analyzer” at http://text-processing.com/demo/sentiment.com. Because only 50,000 characters can be analyzed at once, I ran them through 400 tweets at a time. The results ranged from varying degrees of neutral to negative. This does not explain what words are being used most frequently or how.

The tool explains its process: “The English sentiment uses classifiers trained on both twitter sentiment as well as movie reviews.” Cleary, I was skeptical of its accuracy and bias over the categorization of various words. To test this theory, I thought of the most controversial word I know: feminist. Lo and behold, it renders a “negative” rating, while “sexism” clocks in at “neutral.” I believe sentiment analysis could be a great tool for DHers to improve upon, yet it would pose very difficult challenges in terms of objectivity. Can sentiment ever truly be objective? Must it be?

With the suspect results of the sentiment analysis, I wanted to try another tool and headed to www.textalyser.net. Beyond “Obama,” “obamaspeech,” and similar others, the top words that appeared among the data set Tweets were “muslims,” “ISIS,” and “fear.” How much does context matter here? While “fear” signals a negative reaction and may suggest people are discussing their worry, a search for “fear” in this sample demonstrates that it, conversely to the robots’ analysis, is used as part of a positive message spoken by the @POTUS himself: “freedom is more powerful than fear.” Again, I just nonchalantly labeled this message “positive” and I’m sure one of the TopTweeters would have some different perspectives on the matter.

Sifting through and manipulating this data set reminds me of our conversation in class, in which the goal of DH is to draw on the combined strengths of computers and humans: data processing and analysis, respectively. In review, it is clear that there is much to be done to create/improve tools for DH research. However, these current tools that explore social media data offer an extremely fascinating starting place.

Despite my initial grumblings of Stephen Ramsay’s statement that you must code to be a DH scholar, I am slowly feeling like there is quite a bit of truth to the statement. Despite his exclusionary stance, and what feels a bit like academic bullying and elitism, I find myself looking up classes on computer coding with the goal to create refined tools for DH research (and my guilty pleasure: Raspberry Pis) because it is clear there is a lot to be done. While my MA work operated around social media scraping, I am very interested in pursuing these tools as they ooze opportunity and provide new ways of seeing. The tools may be difficult to create and there may be a steep learning curve, yet creating greater accessibility around “big data” for humanities researchers is a fruitful goal. If Twitter had existed during the Middle Ages, now is the time in which I would tweet “DH goals RT @GeoffChaucer: The lyf so short, the craft so longe to learne.”

TAGS spreadsheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1xUHx2pIqUwHmDgqC0irmRnDljPrB1pepXVixO38Zwhk/edit?usp=sharing
