  Salman Rushdie and Twitter
  
  Despite initially scorning Jonathan Franzen’s loud and negative views on Twitter, Salman Rushdie also agrees with them. Until he changes his mind, no longer endorsing Franzenian Twitter Ire, and he returns to Twitter in order to publicize his new novel,Two Years Eight Months and Twenty-Eight Nights, his first fictional work in seven years. The title—adding up to one thousand and one nights—has received mostly positive reviews. Some of these reviews are tweeted @Salman Rushdie, which the author then retweets either graciously with his thanks or cockily without any added commentary. But while tweets around other authors may skew towards a new publication, Rushdie cannot escape the shadow of Midnight’s Children and especially The Satanic Verses.
  
  This is perhaps unsurprising. Both novels are long, controversial, and dazzling. The Satanic Verses remains a banned book in many countries where Islam is the dominant or state religion like Iran, Pakistan, Somalia, and Saudi Arabia. Many Indians remain opposed to it—Rushdie cancelled an appearance at the Jaipur Literature Festival out of concern for his life and even a proposed video appearance gave way to Islamic pressure. While Two Years Eight Months and Twenty-Eight Nights is about Arabic history (djinns, the philosopher Ibn Rushd/Averroes, and One Thousand and One Nights), it does not have a scene relating Muhammad’s wives to prostitutes as in The Satanic Verses. From my understanding—having not yet read the novel—Rushdie’s latest is a more playful and lighthearted work. Because of this lightheartedness and the extremity of opinion frequently associated with Twitter (as in Jon Ronson’s So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed), the novel is either fawned over—saying things of the “It’s great,” “I loved it” sort— or used as a way to talk about the Rushdie of The Satanic Verses.
  
  Often celebrated as something like a living martyr or denigrated for speaking out of his place (on Islam and India, primarily), Rushdie remains fiercely divisive. Articles about The Satanic Verses constantly flood his Twitter feed. He and his Twitter followers comment approvingly when an Indian minister says that India banning The Satanic Verses was wrong. He says that Saudi Arabian Wahhabism is the force and fund behind much of the extremist terrorism we see on the news today (excluding ISIS). The ISIS claimed Paris attacks inspired him, like much of the Twittersphere, to denounce radical Islam while also denouncing anti-Islamic extremists. (His friendships with the religion hating Christopher Hitchens and Bill Maher, leading to appearances on Real Time with Bill Maher, complicate this.) President Obama purchasing Two Years Eight Months and Twenty-Eight Nights—along with Franzen’s Purity—for Small Business Saturday in D.C. captured headlines, soon followed by others remarking that the President thumbs his nose at the deceased Ayatollah Khomeini through this purchase. Rushdie at one point even expresses dismay that his twenty-three year old work remains so relevant. Rarely does one encounter an author wishing his own novel were not relevant.
  
  Rushdie’s decades long feud with Islamic extremism seems inescapable. It is likely that outside of the monograph industry that this will be his legacy. Western democratic liberalism rallying around an important author under fire from Islamic extremists, the simplified story has gone and will go. The public conversation around The Satanic Verses unfortunately shows little sign of changing.
  
  TAGS: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1sesNJS_W-2U48UlHbx8lvej1HreEjUgsDNTRIkg2u5M/edit#gid=400689247
  Caveat: Some of the tweets I draw from may not appear on here-technical difficulteies-but are easily accessible @SalmanRushdie.
